all righty
let's get started so okay oh my goodness
alright let's get started let me see if
there's some I need to record so welcome
guys to the first official healthy gamer
webinar so we're gonna be so this
webinar is gonna be a little bit about
what I call the science of the self so
what I mean by that is that we don't
usually learn how we work right so there
are a lot of like principles about how
human beings function whether it be
neuroscience or psychology or yoga or
meditation like what we learned from
Buddhism or things like that and so
we're kind of going through life without
understanding like the mechanics or how
to use the controller or like the mouse
and keyboard for like who we are
alright so where did desires come from
where does ego come from how does
behavior work how does motivation work
like no one ever teaches us these things
how do you learn how to concentrate how
do you focus your mind on one thing had
like you know what is the nature of
procrastination so this webinar is
actually designed to offer you guys sort
of a comprehensive answer to a lot of
those questions and the structure of the
webinar is going to be as follows so
every day we're gonna do yoga for about
10 minutes so I'm about to shift my
camera and we're gonna do something
called Surya Namaskar the next and then
each day we're gonna have a 30 to 40
minute lecture and today's lecture is
going to be about motivation and how
motivation works where it comes from
what's the neuroscience of motivation
how to create motivation in your life
which is actually incorrect it's really
about unlocking or redirecting
motivation and then we're gonna have
about 10 to 15 minutes for Q&A and we're
gonna end with meditation so my goal
here is to give you guys kind of a
chance to start your day off right
during kovat and because everyone's
gonna be at home and stuff like that so
how can we sort of behaviorally anchor
you to doing something like properly on
a daily basis how
you learn something how can we make it
concrete how can we make it
comprehensive so I encourage all of you
guys to not just watch but to
participate in you know the yoga that
we're about to do so the first thing
that we're going to do is something
called Surya namaskara and Surya
namaskara is the Sanskrit phrase for Sun
Salutation so it's a sequence of yoga
poses that is designed to kind of start
your day off so you're supposed to do it
like in the morning like facing the
sunrise ideally and what I like about
the Surya Namaskar is that it's kind of
like a complete set of yoga poses that
you can kind of stick with so when I
first started learning yoga back in 2003
you know Surya Namaskar actually even
before 2003 like when I was a kid and I
would go to like Sunday school like
Surya Namaskar were the poses that they
taught us at the age of 10 and then I
went to India and you know started
learning I mean relearn Surya Musco and
then learned all this advanced yoga and
basically now my main yoga practice is
like back to pseudonymous car because
it's kind of a complete sort of yoga
practice and so what so want one or two
preparatory things about the suit in a
mosque are so the first is that the goal
of yoga is not to become a human pretzel
so the goal of yoga is not to stretch as
much as possible or increase your
flexibility Yoga is actually a
preparatory practice or Ahsan which are
yoga postures or preparatory practices
for meditation so the goal of yoga is
actually to prepare your mind for
meditation or even enter a premeditative
state so what do I mean by that so what
that means is that when you guys are
doing this practice what I want you to
notice is what your mind is doing so the
goal of these postures is to stress you
out enough so that your your mind cannot
wander so the reason that the practices
are difficult is because your your brain
is going to be your somatosensory cortex
which is the part of your brain that you
know gives you information about your
body is going to be sending you so many
signals that you're not going to be
able to have your mind wander right so
if we think about when does the mind
wander the mind wanders when we are
physically relaxed so if you're
physically stressed out it's actually
very hard for the mind to wander and if
you have a physical demand then the mind
is going to focus on that thing so the
goal of yoga practice I want you guys to
find the point in the yoga practice so
if I tell you know for example bend down
and touch your toes the goal is not to
actually touch your toes the goal is to
go down as far as you can to the point
that your mind is focused on touching
your toes okay yeah I know you guys are
so some of y'all are in the EU and
things like that so you know hopefully
if y'all are here live that's fantastic
so do yoga in the middle of the day and
yeah so we're gonna go ahead and start
[Music]
we're gonna do three so we're gonna
start so start by putting your hands
this guys can still hear me okay so
start by putting your hands so put your
feet together and stand up straight and
your angles should be touching so you
don't want your feet spread apart you
want two right next to each other
and then place your hands in front of
you like this close your eyes and notice
that when you close your eyes you be can
begin to be unstable that's the first
step right if you open your eyes
stability returns and then go ahead and
close your eyes again
and instability returns
so just feel that instability focus on
stabilization and notice that your mind
focuses as soon as the instability
returns open your eyes
is instability goes away the mind
becomes free once again and then go
ahead and close your eyes feel that
instability and now we'll begin the
practice of subi Namaskar
so the first step is to raise your hands
hands above your head you can open your
eyes now and go ahead and let your
biceps touch your ears so the goal here
is to keep your biceps touching your
ears and that's really the posture that
you want and just go ahead and feel this
for a second feel the stretch in your
back the pull excellent go ahead and
feel that as you hold it you may begin
to quaint a little bit that's perfectly
okay and now we're going to go down to
step two which is to touch your toes now
in this posture we're gonna have to be
very careful because the goal actually
is not to touch your toes the goal is to
hang your head and hang your body down
and I want you guys to notice that
there's tightness maybe in the back of
your legs or in your back or even in
your neck and now what I want you to do
is let gravity pull you forward let
gravity pull you forward keep your legs
straight let your head hang and we're
just gonna hang like this for a second
you notice all the sensations that arise
in your body your body's like hey man
what are we doing why are we doing this
then notice go ahead and come up a
little bit
and then notice how it's easier and as
you go down let your your body hang let
your head hang hold that for a second
and now we're gonna do step three so
what I want you guys to do is put your
palms face down right next to your feet
so you're kind of squatting right so
you're pop the palms of your hands or
face like
touching the ground just like your feet
you may feel a little bit of a stretch
and I want you to take your right leg
and put it back behind you like this so
as you look down you should be able to
see actually so as you look down I
see that as you look down you should be
able to see you know your palms and your
your left foot in a straight line your
knee is gonna kind of be in your next to
your shoulder and then you got this this
stretch in the back and notice that you
can maybe move your leg up or down a
little bit and it kind of enhances the
stretch you can kind of go down and lean
into it right and then you can kind of
go up and just hold that for a second
now put the other leg back okay and now
we're gonna kind of enter push-up
position and hold this for a moment
notice it and then we're gonna lay down
on the floor and this part is gonna be a
little bit weird so what I want you guys
to do is I want your toes on the floor
knees on the floor hip like butt in the
air so you're a hips up it's not
touching the floor chest touching the
floor you don't want your belly touching
the floor and the last thing is for that
so you're kind of touching the floor on
four points forehead chest knees and
toes and that's going to create like
notice what happens if you just like lay
your head like this you're relaxed as
you touch your forehead to the floor
notice what happens to the back of your
neck next what we're going to do is when
I move our hips to the floor and we're
gonna push up so I'm going to show you
guys this way okay so we're not going to
do it and actually push up but your hips
stay on the floor and you just want to
bend your torso upward so your knees
your elbow should be raised
I want your shoulders rolled out so
don't go like this don't go like
shoulders out elbows out is fine and
feel that stretching your back feel that
stretch and now what we're gonna do is
push up and then butts in the air and I
want you guys to form a triangle form a
triangle with your kind of with your
body so palms face down once again your
head should be kind of aligned with your
biceps or even maintained and then the
last thing that I want to do if you guys
really want to feel a nice stretch put
your heels to the ground so try to keep
your toes on the ground and try to
flatten your feet and notice what
happens when you try to flatten your
feet you'll feel fuel a beautiful
stretch in your cap and just focus on
that sensation and now what we're going
to do is return back to a previous post
so now I want you to take your right leg
and put it forward okay so now that
these that your two hands and the right
leg are kind of in a line and feel that
stretch in your hips and then just kind
of feel that for a second and now back
up to touching your toes let your head
hang and then up and then back to the
start
okay we're going to do one more round so
go ahead and relax for a second notice
what your body is doing like your body's
kind of like waking up right it's kind
of feeling a little bit more take a deep
breath now we're gonna do one more round
we're gonna do this one quicker okay
palms in front of you feet together and
then up biceps to the ears and then down
touching your toes remember keep your
legs straight back bent
let gravity pull you down
notice the stretch in your legs as
gravity pulls you down and then right
leg back and then look up so right leg
back left foot and two hands in the line
and then other leg back so we're going
to kind of be in push-up position feel
that for a moment go down so toes knees
chest and forehead
feel that stretch in your neck and now
push up hips to the ground back bent
shoulders out knees I mean elbows bent
feel that stretch and then they'll look
up ooh my favorite awesomes it's called
Bruijn awesome awesome so feel that - I
guess part of my thoughts on mountain
pose or a downward facing dog I think is
what people call it nowadays and so
remember put your make a triangle with
your butt in the air and then put your
your heels into the ground feel that
stretch in your calf now right leg
forward okay look up feel that stretch
yeah it's good and then other leg
forward
let yourself move down let gravity do
the work for you don't push it
hands up
biceps to the elbow and then back to
Center
okay what do you guys you guys want to
do one more let's check in I have lied
okay let's do okay
well we'll start with two so we'll do
three tomorrow okay so let's switch
gears okay how was that okay too fast
all right one more okay we're gonna just
start with we're gonna start with two
okay so I want you guys so some people
may have difficulty with that because
it's like you know it's kind of new for
your body so we're gonna start with two
don't worry guys well we'll work our
ways up okay well patience okay lesson
number one is patience patience so let's
give everyone I know you guys wanted you
could hey you know this is kind of
interesting did you guys know that you
can do this on your own that you don't
need dr. kay to teach you fascinating so
if you guys want to do one more go for
it
or do it on your own time or you can
start with three in the morning we're
gonna do three tomorrow okay so we're
gonna over time gradually build up our
have people are sweating so people are
having a different kind of response to
this which is perfectly okay but what I
really want to do is get to I want to be
a little bit mindful of our time so
we're gonna get to the lecture cuz
that's good - okay all right oh no
devices connected there we go okay so
you can have a little bit of water and
just notice how you feel for a second
okay all right so next what we're going
to do is we're going to start our
lecture so we're going to start talking
about motivation
okay all right so let me just get set up
I feel like my arms are too short oh
yeah you will discover all kinds of
things about your arms and body when you
do yoga okay so let's just start this
testing testing testing okay all right
so let's go ahead and switch so today
[Music]
we're gonna talk about motivation so
let's start with this this over here
okay so how are we gonna understand
motivation okay so the first thing that
I want to share with you guys is that
we're going to talk about motivation
okay so the first thing is we're going
to talk a little bit about our approach
and how this seminar is structured so
the first thing is that I want us to
draw on a couple of sources of
information the first is going to be
observation so rather than rely on
science or what we know or what we've
read we're actually going to focus on
observation so we're gonna develop
hypotheses and we're gonna make
observations about ourself and see if we
can uncover things about motivation to
better understand how it works the
second source of knowledge that we're
going to rely on is actually like the
yogic or meditative tradition so this is
kind of where I learned a lot of this
stuff and what I mean by that is that
you know Yogi's like basically we're
experts at observing the self and
through observing the self they made
certain observations or conclusions and
that's going to be a lot of what we draw
on the third thing that we're gonna draw
on is neuroscience and I know I just
said we're not gonna rely on science but
what I mean by that is that I don't want
you guys when when I'm asking you a
question
I don't want your answer to be what
you've read I want it to be what you've
experienced because here's the thing out
like reading
something right so you can read a book
that explains to you how alcoholism
works in the brain and that doesn't
necessarily change your ability to
control whether you have a drink or not
so what's more important than what
experts say is what you discover about
yourself okay and this is going to be
true this segment is gonna be true for
basically every part of the webinar that
we do that the most important thing is
what do you observe or what do you
experience and if it's contrary to what
the most brilliant neuroscientist says
that's fine forget about the
neuroscience because you've got to deal
with you okay so that's just kind of a
quick kind of background about how this
is structured okay so now our discussion
on motivation is going to have four
segments the first segment is do we
really lack motivation so we're gonna
spend a few minutes talking about you
know what's the actual problem like
what's going on here like how like what
is motivation do we really lack it how
do we determine that we lack it or not
and the second thing that we're gonna
ask is how does motivation work so once
we define our problems so this is
defining our problem okay this is going
to be like understanding or problem the
next thing is what does this mean for us
right so this is applying you know our
understanding of things to us and the
fourth thing is what do we do about it
right so this is kind of actions or
moving forward and this is what everyone
everyone wants number four but we're
gonna take our time in getting there
okay because I think jumping straight to
solution actually isn't as important as
you know really understanding what the
problem is so let's start with number
one okay so do you lack motivation so
let's just think a little bit about
motivation so people tend to say that
okay like especially in kind of Gen Z
Millennials right we kind of say oh I
lack motivation I don't have any
motivation I'm lazy I'm undisciplined
whatever so let's just think about that
for a second so the first thing is that
this is a very very common problem right
so lacking motivation is common that's
number one so what is that what's the
significance of that so the first thing
that I want you guys to understand so
I'm a physician right so I think about
things kind of from a medical standpoint
and what I want to share with you guys
is that pathology is rare what do I mean
by that if we look at actual diseases or
things that are broken within people
those tend to be rare for example like
cancer like not everyone doesn't have
cancer like cancer is a rare rare thing
and and if you're unlucky it kind of
happens to you or someone that you love
but generally speaking the body works
the way it's supposed to so if there's a
common problem I don't actually think of
it as a problem if an entire generation
of people are facing a common shared
problem which is that you know we all
lack motivation it's not that we lack
motivation it's not actually a problem
it's actually the way that we're wired
right does that make sense
like if everyone shares a particular
thing like everyone can use their left
and right hand or presumably most people
can use their left or right hand and if
everyone can do it earth it's a common
issue with most people then that's sort
of how we're designed so the first thing
to understand is that
okay how do I there we go okay so the
first thing to uncannily that
fascinating no problem okay so the first
thing no okay
so pathology is rare we all we all lack
motivation okay so then what this means
is that actually our brain makes us
unmotivated and I'm sorry guys I'm a
doctor which means I have terrible
handwriting right so even though we
we're using electronic medical records
we still have terrible handwriting and
so so our brain actually makes us
unmotivated and that this isn't actually
this is not broken I want you guys to
really understand this that your lack of
motivation is not a problem it's
actually how your brain is wired and so
the first thing that this kind of clues
us into is if everyone's doing it and it
seems to be like really really common
then like that's what our brain is
designed to do it's how our brain is
supposed to be and so like this this I
think is really important because the
basic reason that I think so many people
struggle to fix their motivation is that
they're defining the problem incorrectly
we're trying to fix something that
fundamentally is not broken where our
brain is designed a particular way and
so you're trying to redesign the
function of your brain which is like not
possible so instead what you should do
is like understand how your brain works
and then create a life that sort of uses
your brain for you instead of trying to
reprogram your brain okay so what do we
kind of do with this okay this second
thing I'm good
[Music]
okay there we go
so the second thing is do you really
Mack lack motivation so let's just think
about this for a second are you you
motivated so what people usually say is
that people usually say like no I'm not
motivated and let's think about this for
a second
so when you wake up every day and you
kind of feel bad about yourself and
let's say I'm just assuming for a moment
that you spend your whole day kind of on
social media reddit Instagram YouTube
gaming etc like you wake up every day
and you feel terrible about yourself so
you have all of this like shame and and
like all these like you know negative
feelings which we hate having and
despite having all those negative
feelings and suffering we continue to do
the same thing so I want you guys to
think a little bit about suffering and
how suffering motivates us right and if
we think about it usually like we try we
try very hard to avoid suffering like if
I have you know if I go to school and I
get bullied and people beat me up
everyday like it's really hard for me to
go to school and so even if we think
about it
despite daily suffering we continue in
our patterns in our patterns so what
that means
so usually suffering causes us to change
our behavior but what this means is our
suffering is actually less than our
motivation just think about that for a
second right in order for you to
continue doing something that causes you
so much pain and suffering you actually
have to be highly highly motivated to do
it so when people tell me oh I have no
motivation in life all I want to do is
play video games what I really interpret
is I have a high high high amount of
motivation to play video games all the
time it's not that you lack motivation
it's that your motivation
is pointed in the wrong direction so
just think about this for a second how
hard is it for you to stop playing video
games it can be really really hard and
if it's it's really really hard that
means you're like highly highly
motivated to play video games
so let's first understand that the
problem isn't that we lack motivation
the problem is that our motivation is
pointed in the wrong direction and
furthermore we don't really think we
don't really think about how complicated
tasks are and we actually have a lot of
different kinds of motivation but this
is the main thing to understand so now
if we kind of accept this premise and if
you guys you know I encourage you to
observe yourself and ask yourself do you
continue doing a behavior despite it
causing you suffering and if the answer
is yes that means your motivation
circuitry is actually really hardcore
geared towards that behavior and so then
the question becomes like okay so then
then you know why do people struggle to
fix it and I think the reason people
struggle to fix it is because they
conceived of it is a lack of something
whereas like it's not that it's a lack
of something it's just that that thing
is there and and it's pointed in the
wrong direction so what people try to do
is create motivation instead of shifting
motivation and I don't know if you guys
realize this but like creating something
that already exists is like really
really hard but if the problem is not is
not that you lack it the problem is that
like it's an issue of direction not an
issue of like absence or presence and
this is the first fundamental mistake
that people make right as they try to
fix something that isn't broken
right your effort is completely wasted
because actually your motivation
circuitry is intact and you're highly
highly motivated you're just motivated
towards the wrong thing so instead of
making motivation what you really need
to do is like learn how to turn the
steering wheel and then you're going to
be in a far better place so my answer to
this question is do you lack motivation
my answer is no I actually think that
most people in our generation are highly
highly motivated did they're just highly
motivated in a direction they don't want
to be if you think about people who like
play tons of video
like grind stuff right like they're
dedicated to playing 10 hours 12 hours
18 hours a day day after day after day
week after week after week you know
people who are sort of addicted to
social media and are dedicated to making
posts and crafting their posts and
getting likes and getting follows
they're like so dedicated to it they're
highly highly motivated and so you know
that the answer is do you lack
motivation no so let's start there so on
to number two
okay how does motivation work okay so
the first thing is that motivation isn't
binary and what I mean by that is if you
think about motivation we talk about
motivation in a way that is like I lack
motivation or I have motivation but
that's not actually how motivation works
it's not binary right if you think about
your day like let's say so I have a I
have a glass of water right so I have a
glass of water here and if I have a
glass of water then you know my
motivation to drink it is like one type
of motivation my motivation to make
money is separate my motivation to work
out a separate my motivation to play
video games is separate motivation is
not one thing there are a thousand
different things that calculations that
our brain is brain is performing all the
time and depending on those calculations
we actually engage in the action or we
don't engage in the action so that mean
is that we have thousands of motivation
calculations and why is this an
important point so I believe that in
order to move forward in life you need
to understand and define your problem
and this is also something that comes
from medicine which is that if you want
to appropriately treat a disease you
have to appropriately diagnose a disease
so I think a big problem that people
face is of inappropriate diagnosis so
they say I lack motivation but that's
not really
actionable like you can't flip a switch
in your brain to create more motivation
and that's why they fundamentally fail
because they're trying to solve a
problem that doesn't exist so of course
that's going to lead to failure they're
developing treatments with an improper
diagnosis so what we have to understand
is that motivation is actually a
thousand different calculations kind of
constantly going on and so let me just
kind of put that down so motivation
really is an ongoing calculation about
likelihood of success this is what
motivation is and now we're gonna switch
gears for a second okay so application
window interesting let's do this then
okay so now we're gonna do a little bit
of we're gonna take a look at
neuroscience okay all right great okay
so I want to we're gonna see a little
bit about what what this means for us
and we're gonna look a little bit at
science so this is a paper by actually a
good friend of mine dr. Daoud who we
trained together and so this is a paper
about schizophrenia and I think it's
bizarre but one of the best ways to
learn about motivation is through
studying schizophrenia and why is that
so if we want to understand how
something works one of the best ways to
understand the function of something is
to look at cases where it's broken right
so if we want to like understand okay
how does an engine work if we remove one
piece of the engine and the engine no
longer turns on we can study the engine
and sort of figure out okay what is the
role of that one piece does that make
sense
we want to understand something looking
at a broken version actually give us a
lot of insight into what you know what
is broken and what influence that part
has and so why do we look at
schizophrenia because in schizophrenia
people have two major things going on
one is something that we call positive
symptoms and this is usually what the
media portrays which is that people will
sometimes become paranoid or hallucinate
or have delusions and we actually have
decent medications for that the real
problem in schizophrenia is actually
something that's better called negative
symptoms which are over time people with
schizophrenia start to become like
really really a motivated so when you
kind of think about the quintessential
crazy homeless person I'm not trying to
be judgmental or anything but a lot of
times people with schizophrenia end up
in like bad social situations because
their motivational drives aren't
functioning properly and so what we know
from schizophrenia is that that
basically like some of their
motivational circuitry doesn't work
properly so let's just define you know
as we look at the paper
so what we see from negative symptoms is
aspects of schizophrenia include
constructs such as a sociality which
that what that means is people like are
not social a volition a reduction in the
motivation to initiate or persist in
goal directed behavior this is exactly
what we're talking about and anhedonia
reduction in the ability to experience
pleasure
so a volition is something that we see a
lot in schizophrenia and I think is a
lot you also see it in our generation so
let's try to understand how evolution
works and so what we're gonna do in this
paper is we're really gonna look at this
figure okay and the first thing that I
want you guys to notice is that the
behavioral response is over here and you
know when we think about motivation we
think about okay no motivation means
kind of so the first thing is that no
one really appreciates that there's a
lot of complicated stuff that goes into
a behavioral response that's the first
issue right so you guys say oh I'm not
motivated I need motivation it's not
like a leads to be
there's actually a lot of different
things that happen in the brain that
lead to a behavioral response and create
motivation so what we're gonna focus on
today so I can run through these so the
first thing is hedonics so what that
means is how likeable the behavior is so
how pleasurable the behavior is the
second thing that kind of goes into this
input is how much you want it so I want
you guys to understand this for a second
wanting and liking or two different
things
okay we oftentimes conflate the two but
there are actually completely different
circuits in the brain your desires and
pleasure are actually different things
even though they're they're tightly
related reinforcement through
reinforcement learning through reward is
dopaminergic and this is wanting and
actually enjoying something is different
anyway we're not gonna go too much into
that what I really want to focus on is
this stuff so the first thing is that
our brain is constantly performing a
cost-benefit analysis and what that
means is that we're like int we're
taking in new information we're
computing some kind of like we're
performing a computation and then based
on like new information in a computation
that we're doing we construct a plan and
then it leads to a behavioral response
okay so what does that mean so we're
gonna kind of go back to all right so my
point and kind of diving into that
neuroscience for a second is simply that
let's hold on okay my screen there just
got restart my screen mirroring there we
go
[Music]
so now going back to this okay so what
does this mean for us so the main thing
to understand is that motivation is not
binary and that actually there's a
constant calculation that's going in our
in our brain about what we should do and
what we should not do so if I think
about like drinking a glass of water you
know right now I don't feel like
drinking the glass of water and my brain
is performing a calculation as my sodium
level rises in my bloodstream it sends
signals to my brain that make me crave
water and get thirsty and whether I
respond to those signals or not
depends on all kinds of things like the
availability of water so if water is
close by and I'm not very thirsty I'm
likely to drink it but if water is not
close by then the thirst actually has to
increase to change my behavior to get me
to go drink water you guys got that so
like there are all kinds of like
processes that are going on about
availability of water what's my thirst
level what am i doing right now am I
going to be able to drink water later
should I drink water now there are all
kinds of things that kind of even go
into something as simple as drinking
water and so what does that mean for us
like why do we care about understanding
motivation that way and so I'll kind of
give you guys an example so like I think
understanding the complexity of
motivation helps us understand the
different components we can act on to
increase motivation if we think about it
as 100% or 0% then it's like hard to act
right but if we think about motivation
is 90% and there's like kind of a 60%
30% then like how do we navigate between
these how does our brain sort of decide
like if you know how do we move from 30
to 60 to 90 and as we understand more
variables we can actually start to make
changes in our life to move in this
direction so let me give you guys kind
of an example of this process and how
understanding complexity of something
how
sus do a better job ah so sometimes
people come to me and they say I want to
be healthy and then what's my answer
that do I say okay here's how you be
healthy like okay let me just give you
health and people walk around they say
oh I want to be healthy I want to be
healthy I want to be healthy I want to
be healthy I'm not healthy I'm not
healthy I'm not healthy I'm not healthy
and so how do you become healthy is
healthy something you can become like
you just become healthy no but that's
the way that we talk about motivation we
say oh I want to be motivated I lack
motivation I have a motivation other
people have motivation I don't have
motivation I need motivation I need
motivation and people can walk around
and they say oh I want to be healthy I'm
not healthy other people are healthy I
wish I was like them if I was luckier in
life I would have been born healthy just
like they're born healthy but instead
I'm lazy and they got the they got dealt
a good hand in life where their laziness
level is low and my laziness level is
high and so I don't have motivation I
wish I could be motivated right so this
is where I think like if we think about
this like it's absurd like you don't
become healthy well okay
you don't really become healthy what you
do is you understand that health so
health is an emergent property based on
multiple variables and now what I want
you I want you guys to just think about
that like that makes sense right
health is a function of whether you
exercise what you eat whether you see a
therapist whether you meditate whether
you spend out time outdoors whether you
socialize health is a really really
complicated process and if someone comes
to me and says I want to be healthy can
you give me a pill to make me healthy or
what is the strategy to uncover health
my answer is there isn't one there are
actually a dozen strategies and the more
you understand the components of health
the easier it is to be healthy so what
we're gonna do is replace this word with
motivation right is an emergent property
that's based on multiple variables is an
ongoing calculation about the likelihood
of success and this calculation has many
variables okay so then the question
becomes part three what does this mean
for us okay so what we do is we do a
likelihood of success calculation okay
so I want you guys to think about this
for a second our brains evolved not in
our current society but in a society
where we were like hunter-gatherers
cavemen whatever so I want you to
imagine that there was there's a there's
a caveman with a spear right and the
caveman wants to go hunting and he wants
to go look for food so he like leaves
his hot in the morning and then he looks
at different trails he sees lots of
different trails right how does he
determine which trail to go down so he
looks at five trails and he's like oh I
don't really know like what to do but
then he sees let's say that he sees
tracks over here so see as he sees
tracks over here what does that do to
his likelihood of success calculation
that he's gonna find food in this
direction is that is the likelihood of
success calculation increases the
probability it motivates him to move in
this direction you guys see that like
suddenly this bit of data actually
changes his motivation very quickly it's
kind of simple right
and then let's
like so this is how he this is where
motivation comes from so we do as a
likelihood of success calculation and
then let's say that like over here he
sees actually like you know a deer okay
so if he sees a deer over here then what
does that do to his success calculation
it increases his success count equation
a lot he's like oh there's actually food
there so suddenly his motivation is
going in this direction now he's going
there even more than over here so if we
think about this his internal motivation
is actually influenced very clearly by
his probability of success calculation
so let's think a little bit about that
what has to do so what goes into our
probability of success calculation so I
have a problem okay and I lack
motivation so let's say that I don't
have a job so what do we think about our
probability of success so like find a
job what's the probability of success
for finding a job the F knows you can't
assign a number to that and if you can't
assign a number to that you're gonna
stay in the middle just think about this
for a second if our brain has no idea
how to assign up a likelihood of success
it's not gonna act right so let's say
okay vs. play a game which makes us feel
better
what's the likelihood of success here
100% so think about this look at it
right how do you find a job like I don't
I don't even know what does that even
mean so when our brain when you wake up
in the morning and you think about okay
I need to find a job and then your brain
is like I don't know how to gauge
whether that's gonna work or not right
it's kind of like waking up in the
and saying I want to I want to find a
pound of gold and your brain is gonna be
like I don't know how to do that
like what's the likelihood of success of
finding a pound of gold and then your
brain is also like okay well we're
feeling bad so that's almost like a need
that it wants to fix like hunger or
thirst
so as negative emotions arise within you
your brain is like hmmm what can we do
about these negative emotions because
I'm trying to protect you buddy and I
know that you're suffering right now why
don't we just go play a game and so the
problem is that you the the your brain
is actually working perfectly fine it's
just it's doing a good job at what it
knows how to do and as long as you view
your problems as something or your goals
as something that like don't have clear
likelihoods of success then you're not
gonna do them and so let's think about
this for a second all right so so a lot
of people nowadays would rather play
games with a 0% chance of finding a job
[Music]
rather than apply for a job with a 10%
chance of success just think about that
for a second you guys would rather do
something that definitely does not help
you move forward in life versus
something that may not help you move
forward in life and how on earth does
this work right why on earth would your
brain pick a 0% chance over a 10% chance
and the reason is because this is
actually not a 0% chance this is a
hundred percent chance of feeling better
so it's not that you lack motivation
it's simply that you know your brain is
doing like a different kind of
calculation and like this is why because
like what this is why you guys do this
right so if you if you think about this
you know this is an observation this
what I was saying about observation so
if we actually look at ourselves we find
this to be true and if this is true
rather than assuming that we're broken
what we should do who is take that
observation and try to use it is like
scientific data and then develop an
explanatory hypothesis that accounts for
this observation the observations that
you make about yourself are not signs
that you're broken they're clues as to
how you work and that's a really really
important principle that I believe a
hundred percent in so don't assume
yourself to be broken assume that
everything about you is data about how
you work and then start to construct a
strategy about how to deal with with
those truths okay so the second thing is
that so if we think about likelihood of
success of success what else kind of
goes into this so the next big thing
that goes into it is confidence right so
like if we think about you know our
hunter again and let's say that there's
a deer over here and then there's a like
yak over here okay
so whether he goes for the deer or he
goes for the Yak depends on his
confidence in being able to catch either
one right and be able to hunt it down so
if we think about a likelihood of
success calculation your fundamental
confidence for success leads to the
likelihood of success so what that means
is that if your confidence is low that
leads to a low likelihood of success and
that's like mathematical and if we have
a low likelihood of success that in turn
leads to low motivation or lack of
behavior right and I don't know how else
to put this but why don't you guys wake
up every day and and jump up into the
air and try to fly because wouldn't it
be awesome to be to be able to fly like
it would be cool if you could fly like
imagine like how fun that would be
but why don't you
wake up everyday and jump up and try to
fly like why don't you guys do that
because the likelihood of success is
close to zero so even though you want to
be able to fly you're not going to spend
time trying to fly if the likelihood of
success is zero so likelihood of success
leads to motivation or lack of Beor or
behavior and if we think about what
leads to likelihood of success its
confidence in your ability okay
so what is this so what should you do
all this stuff is fine
what now right what should you do so the
first thing to understand well so let's
like look at our equation so confidence
[Music]
leads to likelihood of success which in
turn leads to motivation so now the
question is if we want to increase this
quantity how can we act on these two
quantities so the first is that we can
change our task from find a job
likelihood of success 0% or a lecture
that's not say zero let's be a little
bit more fair okay let's say one percent
okay to apply for a job
ah now what happens so when if we set
our target is applying for our job our
brain is like oh like apply for job I
can do that let's say 30 percent let's
remember we're us right so even though
it's perfectly in our control our brain
is like oh like applying for a job like
I understand what that means okay
let's even change it a little bit
further fill out a job application
no that's like 50% and then download a
job application
that's pretty easy that's like 80%
downloading job application is easy you
guys see this this is the trend so you
have to program your task so that your
brain is like oh actually I can do that
so if we go back to our hunter if we
tell our hunter go find go find food in
the mount like in the ten-mile radius
the hunter doesn't know where to start
you guys get that the more roads they
have the bigger the task is the more
paralyzed the hunter is so if the hunter
gets some kind of data that focuses his
attention his ability to act actually
increases so we need to do the same
thing over here we need to change our
tasked to increase the likelihood of
success and as you increase the
likelihood of success you're more able
to act so next question is what about
confidence so we're gonna do an entire
video on confidence but let's just think
a little bit about this so what leads to
confidence so the first thing I mean you
know how do you get confidence so the
first thing is that I'm going to kind of
just toss out a couple of things the
first thing is that dealing with
negative emotion so one of the things
that keeps us from being confident is
that we're sitting on these piles
generally speaking of like negative
emotion and if you feel bad about
yourself like if you have shame if you
have fear if you have low self-worth
then it's gonna heart it's it's hard to
be confident and confidence is gonna
affect all of these numbers right so the
first thing and this is kind of weird
because everyone kind of thinks about oh
how do I solve motivation how do I apply
for a job you know that they're looking
sort of externally or even they will
talk about habit or brain hacks or you
know they'll develop all kinds of
external strategies whereas my
overwhelming experience is that if you
actually deal with your negative
emotions your confidence increases and
the motivation naturally goes up the
motivation just goes up on its own it's
just like it happens magically like as I
do therapy with people and I help people
process their negative emotions they
just start being more active in life so
one solution to motivation is just by
directly dealing with your confidence
and addressing your confidence the next
thing that you can do is understand
where confidence comes from so
confidence a lot of people think that
confidence comes from success but
actually that's not true so if you guys
watch some of our videos you'll realize
that success after success after success
actually leads to things like impostor
syndrome so confidence comes from
[Music]
surviving failure okay and so what that
means is that when most people are
thinking about motivation they think
that if they get like something good
going on for them they'll be motivated
and that kind of leads to like
positivity so what I want you guys to
understand is that you know likelihood
of success comes from confidence right
so we kind of have this relationship
here and confidence comes from surviving
failure and so the real key to building
confidence is actually failing and what
that means is that failure leads to
confidence in confidence leads to
success so what that means is that
failure really leads to success and
let's just think about this for a second
like if you think about a kid right how
does a kid get confident and walk
if you if you've ever watched a kid
learn how to walk at first there they're
hesitant to walk because they're afraid
of falling so they hold onto things and
you try to get them to take like one or
two steps and you really have to
encourage a kid to learn how to walk and
so the tricky thing here is like how
does a kid learn how to walk and what
happens is they fall and then they get
back up again and they're like oh
actually falling is not that big of a
deal and the more they fall the easier
it becomes to try so failure makes
trying easier and trying is about
success confidence is about dealing with
the uncertain right so confidence isn't
guaranteeing a result if you're
confident in something you're willing to
do something with uncertainty and so if
you guys want to work on your motivation
I'd say two things one is change your
task okay oh no no no okay so
change your task right and the second
thing is fail this is what you guys
should do and if you really want to
understand how to increase your
motivation those are the two things that
you should do define your task more
clearly and learn how to fail and then
the third thing is deal with your
internal emotions because as long as
this stuff is kind of sitting here you
guys are gonna be like Sol and this if
you kind of deal with this stuff if you
get rid of this stuff then suddenly your
motivation is going to increase it has
nothing to do with your habits or think
I mean it has stuff to do with that but
I think these are kind of the highest
yield things okay so we've got a few
minutes for questions okay so we're
gonna try this how do I I just click to
check for speak
speak accept so I think I'm accepting
people so if you guys you guys want to
try talking how does this work so Martin
I'm accepting hate and I'm accepting you
guys wanna try saying saying something
can other people hear you how does this
work
[Music]
alright
looks like our questions are not working
great
okay so milik le Hadi Josh Joshua Samuel
Daniel J Aditya you guys want to try
speaking
[Music]
so cute okay let's see looks like that's
not working
Daniel has joined Oh beautiful we've got
Daniel and Samuel hey guys okay so ask
your questions what questions we've got
about five minutes ten minutes oh noes
hmm okay
I'm gonna invite more people hello oh
hey ask your question buddy
Samuel Daniel
[Music]
I can't hear anything I'm just gonna
start randomly accepting people maybe
I'm gonna bust the webinar
okay Oh Vince has joined the room there
we go Dell egg great ask your questions
guys let's get started we can't hear
anything
no see a little bit hello yeah ask away
buddy okay I have two questions go for
the first it's like my brain overvalues
my time because I like gaming so much
that like doing anything besides gaming
so I a high cost for me yep and the
second question is like I think I'm
meditating wrong I've been doing like
for eight weeks but like I see the
quests like having major experience at
first and I don't have anything okay so
let's start with the first one so I
completely agree with you that your
brain over values the time from gaming
that's why everyone games because gaming
gives you a very clear like path to
success so what should you do about that
smaller tisks absolutely right so you
have to you have to make the cost of
gaming like if you tell yourself to
apply for a job or get a girlfriend or
get healthy or get in shape your brain
is like that is way too much of a time
investment for a very low likelihood of
success and so what you need to do is
change the equation for your brain
mm-hmm and you say that you're you're
meditating wrong yeah what do you mean
by that
I been meditating for our like over
eight weeks and like I don't have a
technique like I tried everything that
was on YouTube and I feel like I don't
even know mine state and I see the
guests in the show like on the major
having major experiences at first like
Mitch like was major and I don't
remember right yeah so that's kind of
complicated and has something to do with
a Sun script term called Nick Scherr
which means initiation and I'm sorry but
I know this is gonna sound completely
bizarre and is probably gonna create
more questions than it answers but
there's this concept in meditation
instruction where a teacher actually
imparts a portion of their spiritual
energy to the person they're directly
teaching and I actually didn't put so
like you and get in
she ate it into a meditation practice by
a teacher or guru and that somehow that
initiation is worth more than like
learning it from a book or a video or
whatever and I actually did not put any
value in that concept I found no
scientific validity for that concept
until I started making observations that
the people that I teach meditation
directly to oftentimes have big
experiences on the first try whereas a
lot of people watching do not I don't
understand quite how that works so I'd
say that you know continue practicing
and try different techniques we're gonna
do a little bit of meditation now okay
does anybody else have a question I'm
gonna Daniel thanks for coming on buddy
I'm gonna just boot you and don't do it
if it gives room for someone else
[Music]
anybody else have a question yeah yeah
yeah no yep
yeah so basically her I was wondering
that you said you build confidence by
surviving failure yeah and how does it
actually happen like shouldn't failure
diminishes or contents like you
shouldn't really you can build yourself
up that way and second question I cover
this is that does not depend on your
perception like is perceiving failure a
certain way I mean let me rephrase sorry
perceiving failure a certain way might
make you more my increasing motivation
and perceiving it definitely might
reduce it so how do you influence your
perception of that great questions so
the first question was doesn't
how does failure lead to doesn't failure
isn't that a blow to your confidence
mm-hmm right so the answer is yes so I
didn't say that failing leads to
confidence what did I say surviving
failure there's a big difference hmm
what's the difference your perception
very good right so that now we go
straight to your second question which
is that like if if a child
old Falls and gets hurt and they don't
feel like if the consequence of the
action was negative it's gonna be like
it's gonna be a punishment and it's not
going to reinforce the behavior
confidence comes from surviving failure
right it's from knowing that you're
actually alive at the end of the day so
in my case like when I was failing out
of college it did not increase my
confidence at all it was the knowledge
that like one or two years after
graduating that you know I was still me
and that even though I had failed and
that was a challenge it was kind of like
this idea that okay like failing hasn't
actually destroyed me that I'm still
okay I'm still smart I'm still capable
and I just need to change a little bit
about like how I function so surviving
failure is a big difference from failing
and you're right that it has to do with
your perception and understand that like
failure in and of itself is going to be
a negative reinforcer I mean it's not
really the right term it's gonna be a
Punisher for a particular behavior so
it's going to reduce a behavior so this
is exactly why processing and
understanding your perspective is very
important because you're a hundred
percent correct that you need to change
your perspective on what failure means
so a lot of times when we get wrapped up
in the ego we look at one failure and
then we just stop trying again right so
if I fail a class I'm not gonna try
again but if you play a video game and
you lose a game how does that change
your behavior you're just queue up again
exactly so there's so what I want you
guys to do is think about that and
observe within yourself
why doesn't losing a game cause you to
quit playing and why does losing
something at life cause you to quit
playing and if you can understand within
yourself why you can queue up again
that's what confidence is all about
right when we think about someone who's
confident if I asked a girl out and she
says no and I queue up again you view
that person as confidence that's the
very definition of confidence it's not
letting failure affect you and
understanding that like your worth as a
human being is not necessarily tied to
the outcomes of your actions just
because a girl says no doesn't mean that
I'm unlovable but for a lot of people
that's what happens in their
right I mean there are a lot of reasons
that a girl could say no she could be in
a relationship she could have just
finished an abusive relationship she
could be not interested in men sexually
there are all kinds of her romantically
there are all kinds of reasons that
people say no but when our ego gets
involved it no longer is about that
aspect and starts to be about us okay
awesome and great questions I'm gonna
give you the boot to make room for
someone else okay all right anyone else
yeah you can go okay you were talking
about dealing with negative emotions and
I grew up being called stupid and
whatnot throughout my entire life and
I've been failing through the course of
like my education and that kind of led
me to take through gap years and I know
that this is like a big topic on its own
but I want to know like how to
specifically deal with those emotions
because even when I'm listening you talk
I get like this anxiety where I'm like
I'm not going to understand this I'm not
gonna understand this like I'm stupid
I'm stupid okay so you're right that
that is a whole topic in and of itself
and I can't do I can't give you an
answer that you deserve in the time that
we have left but I'm gonna give you one
an answer anyway right so the first
thing is it's good that you notice it so
I'm gonna ask you is it delag a dozen
Delic so delegate so do you if you're
noticing that thing you are not that
thing does that make sense yeah
so that's the first thing to understand
is that you don't have to be defined by
that feeling even though that feeling is
strong it's just a feeling it's not
truth and I know this sounds kind of
bizarre but oftentimes we think our
emotions and our thoughts or facts
that's the way that we live and operate
through life they're not facts there are
just emotions and feelings and if I'm
watching a scary movie and I'm scared
that doesn't actually mean I'm in danger
right now and if I can think all kinds
of thoughts like I can think I'm a dumb
person and my mind is telling me that
but that doesn't mean it's true it's
just my mind telling me that so over
time what you need to do is learn start
to appreciate and notice that delag is
actually different there's a part of you
there's like there's some kind of like I
want you to think about it this way
you're the machine you're the computer
and you have an OS and then you have
programs so the computer is different
from the program and you have a program
that's running in your head that says
deleg is not gonna understand it
delegates not gonna understand it Dalek
is not gonna understand it
it's like Spotify like playing in the
background and you're trying to like
have a voice chat with someone and
Spotify is just gonna like be playing in
the background and then it's gonna be
like really hard for you to function but
just because it's saying that doesn't
mean it's true and that starts that
recognition starts with noticing and and
you know you can also kind of ask
yourself like what are other like if you
don't think so just think about this for
a second if you--if there's a voice in
you that says that you're not gonna
understand it why why are you still in
the sound webinar why don't you drop out
you're not gonna understand in any way
fair no I'm asking it's not I'm not
making a point I'm genuinely asking
question why didn't you drop out of the
seminar because I want to try and
understand beautiful so there is another
program in you that says actually I can
make a difference actually I want to try
and all you need to do is learn to
prioritize that program instead of the
one that tells you that you suck at life
right right so you have both of those
programs within you and then kind of
like the angel and devil on your
shoulder over time you can train
yourself to listen to one over the other
but it starts with individual moments
like this where you chose not to drop
out in the seminar and pay attention to
that think about like why didn't you
drop out did you think about dropping
out what happened in your head that kept
you from dropping out I mean yeah I did
want to drop out of this call because I
thought my question was not valuable and
it's something so why didn't you write
so now you really need to go back in and
pay attention to why you didn't drop out
well because I hate the almond aspirin
sure because I felt as if my issues as
you said it's a common issue where
people feel as if they well they doubt
themselves and then I felt as if since I
have the opportunity here I can ask for
other people as well yeah but so do you
see how that's a different program the
content of the program is fine what I'm
pointing out to you is that there is an
impulse within you that says drop out
and there is another impulse within you
that says no let me do this as part of
my daughter mom let me ask this question
for other people even though people are
gonna think I'm an idiot because I'm
asking a question that's unrelated but
you did it anyway you chose to listen to
the part that was gonna make you feel
like an idiot
and that's exactly what embracing
failure looks like it's choosing the
things that are gonna make you feel like
an idiot that's how you build confidence
because now delag you're a little bit
more confident to speak whether you
realize it or not because you did the
hard thing you made yourself look like
an idiot and it turned out okay right
right so now you've survived looking
like an idiot how does it feel pretty
good there you go
right it's that simple it's not easy
it's simple okay great question man and
more about develop your confidence okay
we're gonna have time for one more and
then then I gotta go yep my question is
about like the focus of meditation of
like motivation okay so like the way of
like shifting your focus from the thing
that you want to the thing that you know
is good for you like beating the like
biological rewarding system of doing the
things you know are not necessarily good
for you okay to put that focus on the
things you know that are good for you
and that you don't necessarily want like
in the instant moment yeah so I would
actually disagree with your premise how
do you know that something is good for
you in the sense that it
would make me I don't know healthy or
would be a an investment of time that I
know would worldwide reward me with
something that we do you know that well
I feel it so where is that feeling
coming from it's from like I don't know
a vision of the future that I'd like to
excellent growth or so let me explain
something to you Vince fantasies about
the future do not factor in to the
likelihood of success calculation that
your brain does this is exactly my point
so I can fantasize about wanting yacht
like I want to have a yacht I want it to
have like very fast internet connection
I'm gonna get a gaming PC stick it on my
yacht and I want to sail around the
world while I game while I'm on the
ocean and then I want to dock in places
and eat delicious local food and what
does that do to my motivation well it
just enters it because it's kind of a
unattainable ideal absolutely right so I
think you're so you're you're starting
with a couple of assumptions that I
don't agree with and that's that you
kind of say there are some things that
are good for me and there's some things
that are not good for me and how do I
choose the thing that is good for me
instead of like playing video games and
I think that your brain doesn't actually
understand that those things are good
for you because I think that they are
like they're they're not things that you
feel they're like random rational
thoughts or fantasies which don't
actually lead to behavioral change that
doesn't go into the equation so I think
actually what you need to do is go back
to that like defining what you want
things so the likelihood of success
calculation so like what's a goal of
like what's an example of something that
you think is good for you the you doing
healthy perfect
so I even addressed this almost directly
eating healthy is not a thing how do you
eat healthy tell me you put your
attention towards buying certain types
food and cooking certain types of mean
for you so what is the likelihood of
success of that the likelihood of
success of putting your attention on
buying healthy food is pretty high but
I'm not so sure about that
right so like you my point is that use
offered a very complicated statement
putting your attention on buying food
and then cooking it yeah so what you
need to do is chunk up each of those
because I agree with you that if you put
your full attention on the buying yeah
that becomes easier than quote-unquote
eating healthy but the problem is that
your brain is like they're a bunch of
other things that you're talking about
here you're talking about
you know being willful when you go to
the grocery store you're talking about
buying food and a lot of people buy
healthy food but then what happens then
you have to cook it you have to prepare
your food yes - and which how to do with
that well it depends on the case but I
mean if you buy the if your answer is it
depends on the case your brain
calculates that is a low likelihood of
success if your brain thinks it depends
that's not a high likelihood of success
does that make sense yeah so therein
lies your problem because you're talking
about eating healthy and health is the
example I use because it's a great
example of how we actually poorly define
tasks for our brain and our brain
doesn't know what to do with that yeah
so I think in your case I would start by
really examining where you get the idea
that there is like something that's good
for you and something that isn't because
I think your brain believes the exact
opposite it's like we can do this weird
fantasy random amalgamation of tasks
that has an unclear chance of success or
we can play a video game yeah got it
okay I got a run so thank you very much
Vince we're gonna do I'm gonna go ahead
and I'm sorry Mikey I gotta kick you but
we're gonna do five minutes of
meditation and then I really do have to
run okay
so sit up straight we're gonna do not II
should be which is alternate nostril
breathing so take your fingers and do
this so what you're doing is folding
these two down if you have to do this
that's okay it's not a big deal it can
also be like this or something like that
it's not a big deal
take your right nostril block your thumb
I mean block your right nostril breathe
in switch and out breathe in through the
same nostril switch out in switch out in
switch out in switch out in switch out
and now continue at your own pace
go ahead and finish the breath that
you're on let your eyes remain closed
let your hands relax
and now kind of notice once again that
there is sort of a basic you there is an
observing self that there may be
thoughts emotions desires conclusions
but those are all products from you
they're not you so all those little
voices inside you that say don't bother
do this or don't do this is your choice
whether you listen to them or not and
that from this place
how true or false they are becomes a
little bit more clear
when you're ready go ahead and come on
back thank you guys very much
day one of our webinar we're gonna
continue tomorrow I don't know if we're
gonna do tomorrow maybe we may talk a
little bit about managing relationships
and tight quarters given covin so like
how to communicate matter with people
things like that maybe something else
I'm not quite sure so thank you guys
very much and we'll see you guys
tomorrow 9:00 AM cxeh Central Standard
Time and we will upload I think to
YouTube so take care